README.md, before:

# Lab Monitoring System

This project contains the firmware for the monitoring nodes used in [Kjaergaard Lab](http://physics.otago.ac.nz/research/kjaergaardlab/), University of Otago, New Zealand. You can view our monitoring dashboard [here](http://hoodoo.otago.ac.nz/mattlab/).

## System Overview

This system uses a collection of sensors connected to ESP8266 and ESP32 boards, programmed with this firmware, modified for the attached sensors as needed. These sensors transmit measurements as text strings (in JSON format) to a MQTT (message queue) server. The measurement messages are then processed by a NodeRED server  which lets us respond live to the data, and also by Telegraf, to pipe the data to an InfluxDB database. The data in the database can then be viewed with Grafana.

![System Overview](doc/system_diagram.pdf "System Overview")

The instructions for setting up the services, and sensor modules can be found below. We do not provide complete documentation for each of the tools and services we use, as they are documented.

## Features
- This firmware has drivers for a reasonable number of [sensors](doc/Sensors.md).
- Data collection is using text over MQTT, which makes combining data from other [sources](doc/usb_device_monitor.py) straightforward.
- The network connection of each module is configured via web-browser, so they don't have to be reprogrammed if the wifi changes.
- Each module can be accessed by web-browser, to check it's status, see any error messages, or update the firmware.

## Getting Started (Firmware)
1. To compile and upload this firmware, we use [PlatformIO](https://platformio.org/). PlatformIO is capable of programming many different devices, automatically configureing toolchains and doing much of the hard work of setting a development environment up for you. We recommend most people install PlatformIO along with VSCode by following the instructions [here](https://platformio.org/install/ide?install=vscode).

  > If one has a preference for a different editor, many are supported by PlatformIO, or one can use [PlatformIO Core](https://docs.platformio.org/en/latest/core.html) from the commandline (or makefiles, or configure commands in another IDE). This project can also be compiled from the Arduino IDE, though this is left as an exercise for the reader. (One must take care to follow the Arduino conventions for libraries and file names, and also install the arduino toolchain for ESP8266/ESP32.) We will proceed assuming that you are using VSCode and PlatformIO to program an ESP developement board.

2. Get the code, if you haven't already. You can download a package with all dependencies from the [github releases](https://github.com/mchilcott/lab-monitor/releases).

  > For the most up-to-date version of the code, using git one can run
  > ```
  > git clone --recurse-submodules git://github.com/kjaergaard-lab/lab-monitor.git
  > ```
  > This will fetch the latest verson of our code, as well as the libraries we use for connecting to different sensors, which are loaded as submodules in git 
  >
  > You may also want to generate the code documentation with Doxygen (if installed) using
  > ```
  > doxygen Doxyfile
  > ```

3. Load the code directory into VSCode -- Use `Open Project` from the PlatformIO Home.

4. Copy `src/auth.example.h` to `src/auth.h`. Inside this file, set the username and password used for remote firmware updates. Pick a username and password combination for the firmware update. If you don't use MQTT authentication (this is the default with the server setup below), then these can be left as `nullptr`, which disables MQTT authentication.

5. Open `src/sensor_config.h`. Give the `node_name` variable a meaningful parameter. Each name should be unique to each sensor node, and be meaningful. One can then add a list of monitoring classes. For now, we can start off by setting up a simple analog monitor:

```
const char * node_name = "analog_example_monitor";

std::vector<DCThread *> collectors = {
    new AnalogMonitor ("sensor/example/analog"),
};
```

The parameter here is the MQTT topic to which the data will be posted. One can think of this as the monitored signal's name.

The `AnalogMonitor` class allows other parameters. The full list can be seen in `MonitorThreads.h` or in the generated documentation at `doc/generated/html/classAnalogMonitor.html`

If we were measuring an analog signal that corresponded to a resistance with a ratio of 1 mV/ohm, which we wanted to measure once every 0.5 seconds (500 milliseconds), we could set up the measurement
```
std::vector<DCThread *> collectors = {
    new AnalogMonitor (
      "sensor/example/resistance", // Measurement name (topic)
      500,                         // Sample period (milliseconds)
      1000 /* ohms per volt */,    // Scale factor
      0,                           // Offset
      "Ohms"                       // Units
    ),
};
```

The measurements would then be reported in ohms once every half second.

More examples for monitoring other sensors can be found in the files in `src/config_examples/`.

6. Connect the ESP board board to your computer via USB, and upload the firmware. In VSCode, this is done with upload button at the bottom of the screen, or by Terminal -> Run Task (Ctrl+Alt+T), and selecting Platform IO: Upload, and then Platform IO: Upload Filesystem

From the termial, try
```
pio run -e <env> --target upload
pio run -e <env> --target uploadfs
```
where `<env>` is either ESP32 or ESP8266 depending on if you are programming an ESP32 modules or and ESP826 module

This will compile your firmware, and upload via USB. If the compilation fails, pay attention to the errors, and check your code. If the upload fails, make sure that the board is connected, and that platformIO is using the correct serial port. You may need to ensure you have the USB serial drivers for the development board - [try here](https://www.silabs.com/products/development-tools/software/usb-to-uart-bridge-vcp-drivers). The serial port can be configured in `platformio.ini` -- see the [platformio docs](https://docs.platformio.org/en/latest/projectconf/section_env_upload.html).

7. Take the freshly programmed node to the lab. For the analog example, connect the signal between A0 and GND and supply power. Power can be supplied by the USB connector, into the Vin port (Which will take anything between 4.75V and 10V), or put 3.3 V into one of the the 3V3 pins. (Be careful not to overload the chip if taking the last option.)

8. If you haven't already, set follow the instructions below for getting started with the data collection services. These modules require an MQTT server to send information to for them to start collecting data.

9. On your phone (or other convenient wifi device), look for a WiFi network with the name `Setup-ESP` followed by a sequence of numbers. Connect to thisand you should be redirected to the configuration page. If the network isn't showing up, then try repowering the controller.

10. From the page that shows up, use the menu (upper right-hand corner) to:
  - Add a new SSID  - Select the network (SSID) your monitoring server is on, and provide the password
  - MQTT Settings - Set the address of the monitoring server you set up in step 8. (Port 1883 is the default for MQTT. Unless you have a different setup, you won't have to change this.) This can either be the IP address of that computer on the network, or the hostname.
  - If you don't find the MQTT Settings in the menu, then please make sure that you have run Upload Filesystem (uploadfs) from PlatformIO

11. Confirm that data is getting sent your monitoring server. The WiFi network you found in 7 should disappear. If the node isn't able to connect to WiFi, or the server, then check that there isn't an issue with your configuration and repeat step 7.

12. Enjoy collecting data. Have a look at the documentation in `doc` and `doc/generated/html/index.html` to get an idea of the capabilities of this system.


## Getting Started (Services)
In our lab, the data collected by the nodes is sent to a MQTT server (mosquitto). From here, data is put in a database (InfluxDB, put there by Telegraf) for visualisation (with Grafana), and made available to an alerting system (NodeRED).

> The firmware expects to publish data to an MQTT server. The rest of the pipeline is flexible, and these measurements can be integrated with an existing system. Telegraf is a useful tool for connecting different data sources (e.g. MQTT) to different data sinks. One can also find libraries for MQTT in many different languages, simplifying developing your own interface.

To set up the services that we use:
0. Install Docker (Community Edition) on the server - You click on your platform [here](https://docs.docker.com/install/#supported-platforms) to get instructions on how to install docker. (While this is open-source software, it is getting increasingly difficult to download and install docker without having to make an account, and even harder to get from their home page to a place where you can find the installer.)

The advantage of Docker, is that it will manage downloading, running and integrating the services.

It may help to erify that docker is installed properly, by running
```
docker run hello-world
```

Note that you may need to prefix this command, and those following with `sudo` if you're running linux, and haven't added yourself to the [docker group](https://docs.docker.com/install/linux/linux-postinstall/#manage-docker-as-a-non-root-user). If you get a "permission denied" type error, try adding `sudo` at the start. You'll probably be prompted to enter your login password. 

1. Install [docker-compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/). This tool is used to automate setting up multiple services together.

2. Copy `telegraf.conf` and `docker-compose.yml` to a directory on your server

3. From this directory, run the command
```
docker-compose up
```

4. If you haven't run any of these services before, take a well-deserved break. Docker will now download all the services (which takes a while) and start them up.

5. Point your web browser at `http://<server>:3000` to get access to Grafana, whiere you can start to build queries, `http://<server>:8888` to get access to Chronograf, which lets you configure the database,
or `http://<server>:1880` to get access to NodeRED and start to build automation flows.

For more information on playing with these services, see `doc/service-guide.md`.

Commit message:

Included note about config password in README

README.md, after:

# Lab Monitoring System

This project contains the firmware for the monitoring nodes used in [Kjaergaard Lab](http://physics.otago.ac.nz/research/kjaergaardlab/), University of Otago, New Zealand. You can view our monitoring dashboard [here](http://hoodoo.otago.ac.nz/mattlab/).

## System Overview

This system uses a collection of sensors connected to ESP8266 and ESP32 boards, programmed with this firmware, modified for the attached sensors as needed. These sensors transmit measurements as text strings (in JSON format) to a MQTT (message queue) server. The measurement messages are then processed by a NodeRED server  which lets us respond live to the data, and also by Telegraf, to pipe the data to an InfluxDB database. The data in the database can then be viewed with Grafana.

![System Overview](doc/system_diagram.pdf "System Overview")

The instructions for setting up the services, and sensor modules can be found below. We do not provide complete documentation for each of the tools and services we use, as they are documented.

## Features
- This firmware has drivers for a reasonable number of [sensors](doc/Sensors.md).
- Data collection is using text over MQTT, which makes combining data from other [sources](doc/usb_device_monitor.py) straightforward.
- The network connection of each module is configured via web-browser, so they don't have to be reprogrammed if the wifi changes.
- Each module can be accessed by web-browser, to check it's status, see any error messages, or update the firmware.

## Getting Started (Firmware)
1. To compile and upload this firmware, we use [PlatformIO](https://platformio.org/). PlatformIO is capable of programming many different devices, automatically configureing toolchains and doing much of the hard work of setting a development environment up for you. We recommend most people install PlatformIO along with VSCode by following the instructions [here](https://platformio.org/install/ide?install=vscode).

  > If one has a preference for a different editor, many are supported by PlatformIO, or one can use [PlatformIO Core](https://docs.platformio.org/en/latest/core.html) from the commandline (or makefiles, or configure commands in another IDE). This project can also be compiled from the Arduino IDE, though this is left as an exercise for the reader. (One must take care to follow the Arduino conventions for libraries and file names, and also install the arduino toolchain for ESP8266/ESP32.) We will proceed assuming that you are using VSCode and PlatformIO to program an ESP developement board.

2. Get the code, if you haven't already. You can download a package with all dependencies from the [github releases](https://github.com/mchilcott/lab-monitor/releases).

  > For the most up-to-date version of the code, using git one can run
  > ```
  > git clone --recurse-submodules git://github.com/kjaergaard-lab/lab-monitor.git
  > ```
  > This will fetch the latest verson of our code, as well as the libraries we use for connecting to different sensors, which are loaded as submodules in git 
  >
  > You may also want to generate the code documentation with Doxygen (if installed) using
  > ```
  > doxygen Doxyfile
  > ```

3. Load the code directory into VSCode -- Use `Open Project` from the PlatformIO Home.

4. Copy `src/auth.example.h` to `src/auth.h`. Inside this file, set the username and password used for remote firmware updates. Pick a username and password combination for the firmware update. If you don't use MQTT authentication (this is the default with the server setup below), then these can be left as `nullptr`, which disables MQTT authentication.

5. Open `src/sensor_config.h`. Give the `node_name` variable a meaningful parameter. Each name should be unique to each sensor node, and be meaningful. One can then add a list of monitoring classes. For now, we can start off by setting up a simple analog monitor:

```
const char * node_name = "analog_example_monitor";

std::vector<DCThread *> collectors = {
    new AnalogMonitor ("sensor/example/analog"),
};
```

The parameter here is the MQTT topic to which the data will be posted. One can think of this as the monitored signal's name.

The `AnalogMonitor` class allows other parameters. The full list can be seen in `MonitorThreads.h` or in the generated documentation at `doc/generated/html/classAnalogMonitor.html`

If we were measuring an analog signal that corresponded to a resistance with a ratio of 1 mV/ohm, which we wanted to measure once every 0.5 seconds (500 milliseconds), we could set up the measurement
```
std::vector<DCThread *> collectors = {
    new AnalogMonitor (
      "sensor/example/resistance", // Measurement name (topic)
      500,                         // Sample period (milliseconds)
      1000 /* ohms per volt */,    // Scale factor
      0,                           // Offset
      "Ohms"                       // Units
    ),
};
```

The measurements would then be reported in ohms once every half second.

More examples for monitoring other sensors can be found in the files in `src/config_examples/`.

6. Connect the ESP board board to your computer via USB, and upload the firmware. In VSCode, this is done with upload button at the bottom of the screen, or by Terminal -> Run Task (Ctrl+Alt+T), and selecting Platform IO: Upload, and then Platform IO: Upload Filesystem

From the termial, try
```
pio run -e <env> --target upload
pio run -e <env> --target uploadfs
```
where `<env>` is either esp32 or nodemcuv2 depending on if you are programming an ESP32 modules or and ESP826 module

This will compile your firmware, and upload via USB. If the compilation fails, pay attention to the errors, and check your code. If the upload fails, make sure that the board is connected, and that platformIO is using the correct serial port. You may need to ensure you have the USB serial drivers for the development board - [try here](https://www.silabs.com/products/development-tools/software/usb-to-uart-bridge-vcp-drivers). The serial port can be configured in `platformio.ini` -- see the [platformio docs](https://docs.platformio.org/en/latest/projectconf/section_env_upload.html).

7. Take the freshly programmed node to the lab. For the analog example, connect the signal between A0 and GND and supply power. Power can be supplied by the USB connector, into the Vin port (Which will take anything between 4.75V and 10V), or put 3.3 V into one of the the 3V3 pins. (Be careful not to overload the chip if taking the last option.)

8. If you haven't already, set follow the instructions below for getting started with the data collection services. These modules require an MQTT server to send information to for them to start collecting data.

9. On your phone (or other convenient wifi device), look for a WiFi network with the name `Setup-ESP` followed by a sequence of numbers. Connect to this with password `monitornode` and you should be redirected to the configuration page. If the network isn't showing up, then try repowering the controller.

10. From the page that shows up, use the menu (upper right-hand corner) to:
  - Add a new SSID  - Select the network (SSID) your monitoring server is on, and provide the password
  - MQTT Settings - Set the address of the monitoring server you set up in step 8. (Port 1883 is the default for MQTT. Unless you have a different setup, you won't have to change this.) This can either be the IP address of that computer on the network, or the hostname.
  - If you don't find the MQTT Settings in the menu, then please make sure that you have run Upload Filesystem (uploadfs) from PlatformIO

11. Confirm that data is getting sent your monitoring server. The WiFi network you found in 7 should disappear. If the node isn't able to connect to WiFi, or the server, then check that there isn't an issue with your configuration and repeat step 7.

12. Enjoy collecting data. Have a look at the documentation in `doc` and `doc/generated/html/index.html` to get an idea of the capabilities of this system.


## Getting Started (Services)
In our lab, the data collected by the nodes is sent to a MQTT server (mosquitto). From here, data is put in a database (InfluxDB, put there by Telegraf) for visualisation (with Grafana), and made available to an alerting system (NodeRED).

> The firmware expects to publish data to an MQTT server. The rest of the pipeline is flexible, and these measurements can be integrated with an existing system. Telegraf is a useful tool for connecting different data sources (e.g. MQTT) to different data sinks. One can also find libraries for MQTT in many different languages, simplifying developing your own interface.

To set up the services that we use:
0. Install Docker (Community Edition) on the server - You click on your platform [here](https://docs.docker.com/install/#supported-platforms) to get instructions on how to install docker. (While this is open-source software, it is getting increasingly difficult to download and install docker without having to make an account, and even harder to get from their home page to a place where you can find the installer.)

The advantage of Docker, is that it will manage downloading, running and integrating the services.

It may help to erify that docker is installed properly, by running
```
docker run hello-world
```

Note that you may need to prefix this command, and those following with `sudo` if you're running linux, and haven't added yourself to the [docker group](https://docs.docker.com/install/linux/linux-postinstall/#manage-docker-as-a-non-root-user). If you get a "permission denied" type error, try adding `sudo` at the start. You'll probably be prompted to enter your login password. 

1. Install [docker-compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/). This tool is used to automate setting up multiple services together.

2. Copy `telegraf.conf` and `docker-compose.yml` to a directory on your server

3. From this directory, run the command
```
docker-compose up
```

4. If you haven't run any of these services before, take a well-deserved break. Docker will now download all the services (which takes a while) and start them up.

5. Point your web browser at `http://<server>:3000` to get access to Grafana, whiere you can start to build queries, `http://<server>:8888` to get access to Chronograf, which lets you configure the database,
or `http://<server>:1880` to get access to NodeRED and start to build automation flows.

For more information on playing with these services, see `doc/service-guide.md`.
